Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series. Also,
please like and leave a comment, and share the
video to help spread this free series of videos.
Thanks for your help. Also, remember to
sign up via the link in the description
to get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for the CCNA,
click the link in the video description to
check it out. It’s a network simulator like
packet tracer, but it’s even better,
and it includes all of these guided
labs to not only help you get hands-on
practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the exam
topics. I used it myself when studying for my
certifications, so I feel confident
about recommending it to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we will configure a couple extended
ACLs to fulfill the network policies listed here.
Hosts in 172.16.2.0/24 can’t communicate with
PC1. Host in 172.16.1.0/24 can’t access the
DNS service on SRV1. DNS is something we
will cover later in the course, but even
if you don’t totally understand the protocol
yet you can use extended ACLs to block it.
The third requirement is that hosts in
172.16.2.0/24 can’t access the HTTP or
HTTPS services on SRV2. As you probably know by
now, HTTP and HTTPS are used to access web pages.
As I have said a few times, ACL configuration
is flexible and there are often multiple
valid solutions. In this video I’ll show you my
solution. I will configure two ACLs on R1. One
to fulfill the first and third requirements, and
then another to fulfill the second requirement.
I’ll start with the second
requirement, hosts in 172.16.1.0/24
can’t access the DNS service on SRV1. First, let
me briefly show how DNS works. I’ll go on PC1.
Then open the config tab, and you can
see that I have specified 192.168.1.100,
SRV1, as PC1’s DNS server. DNS, Domain Name
Service, let’s you use specify names instead of IP
addresses as destinations. Let me show an example.
Go to desktop, then command prompt. Let’s try a
ping to PC2. However, instead of pinging PC2’s
IP address, I’ll specify the name PC2. PING PC2.
Now, this ping will take a little longer
than usual. Currently PC1 is contacting SRV1
to learn what the IP address of PC2 is. Although
using names like google.com or youtube.com
is easier than remembering IP addresses for us
humans, the computers themselves still need to
know the IP address. That’s what DNS is for. DNS
servers contain a list of names and IP addresses.
As you can see, although I specified
PING PC2, PC1 asked SRV1 what the IP
address of PC2 is and learned that it
is 172.16.1.2, as is displayed here.
Okay, we’ll cover DNS later, now
let’s go on R1 and configure that ACL.
ENABLE. CONF T. I’ll configure a numbered
ACL. IP ACCESS-LIST EXTENDED 100.
So, let’s deny DNS. DENY, now which protocol
should we deny? If you remember correctly,
DNS uses both TCP and UDP. Usually UDP is used,
however there are cases where TCP is used too,
so let’s block both, I’ll create an entry for UDP
first. Then the source IP, 172.16.1.0 0.0.0.255.
We don’t need to specify the source port, so
next is the destination IP. HOST 192.168.1.100.
And finally the port number. Do you remember
DNS’ port number? It’s 53, so EQ 53.
Okay, now I’ll use the up arrow, and just change
UDP to TCP, there’s the second entry. Finally,
I’ll configure PERMIT IP ANY ANY to allow
other traffic. Now let’s apply the ACL.
Following the rule of applying it close to
the source, I’ll apply it inbound on G0/0.
INTERFACE G0/0. IP ACCESS-GROUP 100 IN. Okay, we
have created and applied the ACL, let’s see if it
works. I’ll return to PC1. Let’s try to ping
SRV2 this time. I’ll try to ping it by name.
PING SRV2. Now, PC1 shouldn’t be able to
learn SRV2’s IP address. I’ll click on this
arrow to skip forward 30 seconds in packet
tracer, and now when I return to PC1 you can
see that it could not find host SRV2. So, PC1
wasn’t able to access the DNS service on SRV1
to learn SRV2’s IP address. How about if I just
ping SRV2’s IP address? PING 192.168.2.100.
As usual the first one or two might fail because
the ARP process is a little slow in packet tracer,
but then the ping succeeds. Okay, so we
have fulfilled the second requirement.
Now let’s make an ACL for the first and third
requirements. They both have the same source,
172.16.2.0/24, so I’ll combine them into
one ACL. IP ACCESS-LIST EXTENDED 101.
So, that first requirement is a
simple deny statement for destination
PC1. DENY IP 172.16.2.0 0.0.0.255 host 172.16.1.1.
That’s it. We’re denying all traffic, so I used IP
as the protocol. Now let’s prevent this subnet
from using the HTTP or HTTPS services on SRV2.
First, let me go on PC3 and show you a website.
I configured an entry for ‘cisco.com’ on the
DNS server, SRV1, so if I use the web
browser here on PC3 and type the URL
‘cisco.com’, PC3 should learn SRV2’s IP address
and be able to access the web page. It’s just
a sample web page which is in Packet Tracer by
default. After we configure and apply the ACL,
we shouldn’t be able to access this web
page. Now I’ll return to R1. Let’s deny HTTP
and HTTPS. DENY TCP, because both HTTP and HTTPS
use TCP. Then the source IP. 172.16.2.0 0.0.0.255.
Then the destination IP. HOST 192.168.2.100.
Finally I’ll specify HTTP. EQ 80. And I’ll add
another entry and change the port number to 443,
for HTTPS. Finally let’s permit all other traffic.
PERMIT IP ANY ANY. Now let’s apply it close to
the source, inbound on G0/1 is best. INTERFACE
G0/1. IP ACCESS-GROUP 101 in. Okay, let’s try to
access that web page again, I’ll return to PC3.
First I’ll close the web browser and open
it again. Now let’s try to access cisco.com.
No webpage appears, PC3 is being
blocked by the ACL we configured on R1,
and the request times out. Now,
how about the first requirement?
Let’s go to the command prompt here on PC3
and try to ping PC1. This subnet is still
able to use the DNS service on SRV1, so I’ll
try to ping it by name. PING PC1. However,
the ACL we just configured on R1 prevents PC3 from
pinging PC1. But a ping to PC2 should work. PING
PC2. Wait a bit for PC3 to learn PC2’s IP address
from SRV1, and then the ping is successful.
So, we have satisfied all requirements.
Finally let’s just view the ACLs.
Let me return to R1. And I’ll
check. DO SHOW ACCESS-LISTS.
There they are, and you can see the
number of matches for each entry
of each ACL. That’s all for this lab. Next let’s
take a look at a lab in Boson NetSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson NetSim lab preview. As
I said before, there are 20 ACL practice labs in
NetSim. So if you want lots of practice
configuring and troubleshooting ACLs,
NetSim is a great tool. Here is the lab topology.
It's the same as the demo I showed you in Day 34,
with Router1 and Router2, and then
PC1 2 and 3, each in their own VLAN.
This time the command summary shows us the
protocol as well as the port numbers. So
these are extended ACLs, not standard ACLs.
Here are the IP addresses on each device.
Notice that Router2 is using router-on-a-stick
here. FastEthernet1/0.2 and .3,
because there are two VLANs here, two subnets,
connected to this single physical interface.
And that will be important
later, so remember that.
Okay, and there is just a single
task, but it's pretty long, 18 steps.
So, for today's demo we will just complete up to
step 7, which says 'on the appropriate device,
apply extended ACL 101 to the correct
interface in the correct direction. So,
we will create this ACL in step 6 and apply it in
step 7. So let's quickly read that task. In this
task you will configure multiple extended ACls
to permit and deny traffic from various protocols
and sources across the topology. You should use
extended ACL best practices wherever possible,
such as applying the ACL as close to the source
as possible. When all tasks are complete,
each PC should remain able to ping the address of
the loopback interface on each router. However,
as I said before, we are not going to
complete all the tasks, just up to step 7.
Pings to other destinations should succeed
or fail per the instructions below.
Okay, so let's get started. First, from each PC
verify that you can ping the loopback0 interfaces
of both Router1 and Router2. So I will open
up a console connection to each of the PCs.
And let's try those pings from PC1.
Okay it works. And I'll try to ping Router2.
Okay, and just for the sake of time I'll skip PC2.
I know you don't want to watch me do a bunch of
pings. Let's try PC3. Okay, it can ping Router1.
And Router2. I'm using Ctrl+C, that's what
this means, Ctrl+C, to stop the pings.
After I get a reply, that means the ping
is successful so I just cut it off early.
Okay, next. From each PC, verify that you
can ping every other PC in the topology.
Okay, from PC1. I'll ping PC2. And it works.
Stop the ping. And PC3. That works as well.
So, because we were able to ping and get a
reply, we have verified two-way connectivity
between PC1 and PC2, and PC1 and PC3. So the
only one we have to do is from PC2 to PC3.
Okay, and we get a reply, so we have also
verified two-way connectivity between PC2 and PC3.
Next up, in steps 3, 4, and 5, we are going to
attempt to Telnet to Router1 and Router2 from
different PCs. I showed you Telnet briefly in the
NetSim demo for Day 34, and we will cover it more
in-depth later in the course. So, first from PC1
to Router2's loopback interface. TELNET 2.2.2.2.
Okay, and because I get this password prompt to
log in, that means the Telnet was successful.
I was able to connect to Router2 with Telnet.
I just have to enter the password to log in.
And it works. It says up here, all
passwords in this lab are configured to
boson. Okay, and the prompt is now
Router2. I'll exit out of there
and then from PC2 and PC3, Telnet to
Router1. Okay, that works. And PC3.
Okay, great. So, step 6. On the appropriate
device, create extended ACL 101.
The ACL should permit Telnet traffic from
PC2 and PC3 to Router1's loopback0 interface.
Limit the ACL you create to a single rule.
Specify the port number, source wildcard mask,
and destination wildcard mask. Okay, so a
single rule. Single rule, single entry ACL,
which allows both PC2 and PC3 to
Telnet to this address, 1.1.1.1.
So, where should I create the ACL, what is the
appropriate device? Well, these are extended
ACLs we're making, so we should create and
apply them as close to the source as possible.
In this case, the source is PC2 and PC3, so
that means we should create the ACL on Router2.
Okay, I'll configure it right here from
global config mode. ACCESS-LIST 101 PERMIT,
now next is the protocol. Telnet
uses TCP as its Layer 4 protocol, so
TCP. And next up the source IP address. 10.10.,
and we want to include both PC2 and PC3,
so both of these subnets, 10.10.2.102/24 and
10.10.3.103/24. So, let me think about that.
10.10.2.0, and a /23 subnet mask should work,
0.0.1.255. Okay, and we don't have to specify the
source port number. So next is the destination
IP address. 1.1.1.1, with a /32 wildcard mask.
Finally, the destination port. This is where we
specify Telnet. So, EQ to specify a single port.
And now I can either specify the keyword,
TELNET, or Telnet's port number which is 23.
I'll use the keyword, TELNET. There we go.
Okay, now here's the really tricky part. We
have to apply it to the correct interface
in the correct direction, as it says here.
Apply extended ACL 101 to the correct
interface in the correct direction.
So, the interface that is connected to
Switch2, and therefore PC2 and PC3 is
this one here, FastEthernet1/0. However, we
cannot apply this ACL to the physical interface,
that will not work. So, we can either apply
it inbound on both of these sub-interfaces,
FastEthernet1/0.2, 1/0.3. Or instead of doing that
if we want to apply it just to a single interface
we could also outbound on this interface
here, it's still pretty close to the source.
Let's do that, since it's simpler. We just
have to apply it to a single interface.
So I will apply it outbound on FastEthernet0/0.
So, when these two PCs try to Telnet to Router1,
the ACL will be checked when Router2 forwards
the traffic out of its FastEthernet0/0 interface,
which is here. It won't check it when it receives
the traffic here on the FastEthernet0/1 interface.
Or sorry, not 0/1, 1/0. Okay, so INTERFACE F0/0.
IP ACCESS-GROUP 101 OUT. Okay, so let's try a
ping from PC2 to Router1's loopback0 interface.
Okay, it's not working. Why is that? It's because
our ACL only permits Telnet from PC2 and PC3 to
Router1's loopback interface. However, the ACL is
just a single line. That means any traffic that
isn't that Telnet traffic will be denied by the
implicit deny at the end of the ACL. So currently
PC2 and PC3 will not be able to ping Router1.
The task description here said that each PC should
remain able to ping the address of the loopback
interface on each router, so I assume later,
in one of the later tasks we would fix that.
But let me just check that PC3 also
can't ping Router1's loopback interface.
Okay, it also doesn't work. How about Telnet?
Telnet should work. So I'll try to Telnet from PC2
to Router1's loopback interface. And it works,
great. And how about PC3? Okay, it works also.
And let's just take a look at that
ACL in the running config of Router2.
There it is, so we are permitting TCP traffic
from this range of addresses here, 10.10.2.0/23,
to host 1.1.1.1, destination port of 23, Telnet.
And all other traffic will be denied because of
the implicit deny at the end of the ACL. Okay,
so after that there are many more tasks here,
but we'll end today's lab demo here. And I will
use Boson's grade lab function. Now, since we
aren't done with the lab it says you missed one
or more commands in the lab, but that's okay.
I just want to check Router2's configuration,
did I get that correct? Oh, so I was right. So,
we did get that entry correct, permitting the
Telnet traffic. But probably later in this lab,
in one of the later steps, looks like we add a
PERMIT ICMP ANY ANY command to allow those pings.
Okay, so that's Boson NetSim for CCNA. If you
want to get Boson NetSim, please follow the link
in the video description. As you can see here,
there are tons of practice labs for the CCNA,
all very in-depth, very good for testing
your knowledge and improving your skills of
configuring and troubleshooting. Once again,
follow that link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under
the video. Thank you to Samil, Aaron, Junhong,
Njabulo, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Apogee, Marko, Daming, Joshua,
Jhilmar, Ed, Value, John, Funnydart,
Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, December 6th 2020,
if you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.